>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of Gaiam Inspirations.
Welcome to our Los
Angeles studio.
The 1998 Oscar award-winning
film "What Dreams May Come,"
starring Robin Williams
and Cuba Gooding,
Jr. was a movie that
was so far ahead
of its time in vision
and creativity.
And so is the film's
producer, Barnet Bain,
who is joining us today.
Barnet is a creative
visionary and
a transformational producer.
He speaks all around the world
to corporations and individuals
about creativity
and spirituality.
And he has blessed us
today with his presence.
Thank you so much for
being here, Barnet Bain.
>>BARNET BAIN: Thank you.
I am so glad to
be here with you.
>>LISA: Honestly,
the honor is mine.
You have such an
incredible visionary eye.
And I know you as
a friend, as well.
Once I saw you at
just a conference.
And you were looking
behind the video camera.
You just got up out of you
seat, an you just looked
behind the video camera.
And I was looking
at lifetimes of you
with the glasses
looking behind the lens.
You have a true talent and a
knack for visual production.
>>BAIN: Well, fortunately
that conference
that you're talking
about we were
amongst our very
dearest friends.
Otherwise, that might have been
considered annoying, I think.
>>LISA: You had
freedom to be yourself.
>>BAIN: Yeah.
>>LISA: Well, so now tell me
about where did you grow up?
>>BAIN: I was raised in a small
French Canadian town 70 miles
north of Montreal in
Sainte-Agathe-des-Monts,
Quebec.
My father was the local butcher,
and my mom was a housewife.
>>LISA: Were you really
highly creative as a child?
>>BAIN: I think we're all
highly creative as children.
It gets shoehorned out of us.
I have an image of this
huge, huge creative potential
that we all have, that
we all come in with.
And then it's like
we're shoehorned
into a very, very
tight fit with life.
We lose it as a result of
other people's thoughts,
and other people's
entertainment, and religions,
and television shows, and songs,
and education, and values,
and world view.
And pretty soon
there's not a lot
of welcoming for what we're
bringing to the table.
We're trying so
desperately to fit in
and to behave nicely
that our freedoms
to create and to express
get reduced, and reduced,
and reduced.
I call it a structured
imagination.
>>LISA: Did that ever happen to
you, that structure happened--
>>BAIN: It sure did.
>>LISA: It did?
It sure did.
>>LISA: And you
didn't get conditioned
by-- well, that's a great point.
I mean, all of those
social media outlets
and everything else that we
have around us provides us
with the visual
pictures that we are not
creating our own back to the
days where there was no TV.
And you get to create
your imagination.
Your imagination
creates pictures
that are not even in books.
>>BAIN: We get structured
more now than ever before,
but there's a flip
side to it, as well.
There's gold as a treasure
inside of that, as well,
because just as our imaginations
are structured by exposure
to so much input, similarly
on the way out when we realize
that, we have developed such
a capacity to create imagery
and to have an
understanding of psychology.
And we have such a
fertile experience
to draw from that when
we do get the picture,
and we can light the fuse to
escape that structured reality,
we really blast off.
>>LISA: Well, that's kind of
what you have done in a sense
because you have, in
the past, expressed
your creativity through
film producing, television
producing.
How do you choose your projects?
Well, let me just back up?
How did you get into that
from the butcher's son
to coming to Hollywood and
becoming a film producer?
>>BAIN: Well, there's two parts.
There's two ways to
answer that question.
And the first is I had dreams.
And I believe that desire,
and dreaming, and expectation,
imagining, those are the
big raw materials out
of which we create lives.
And so I had not been
shoehorned into that structure
sufficiently where I
abandoned all dreams.
I still had dreams.
And I went off to college
after high school.
And I didn't do well.
I went from a town
of 3,000 people
to a somewhat bigger
town in Ottawa, Canada.
And I went wild, and
played, and partied.
And I flunked out of my first
year of college two years
in a row.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>BAIN: And went off to
Europe, and something
in the escape from the
community of my upbringing
allowed me to make different
kinds of choices, choices
that maybe I wouldn't have
felt as comfortable making
in my own community.
So I began to think of art,
and filmmaking, and photography
as a credible
career choice, which
would have been so far a
field in the community that I
was raised in.
So the chance crossing of
those two things-- well,
I have a friend that
used to say that life
is what happens when
you're making other plans.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Uh-huh.
>>BAIN: And so I
thought I was going
to go in a particular
direction, and the direction
that I was socialized to go,
not quite in the butcher shop,
but a more conventional
profession.
>>LISA: Filmmaking
is a conventional--
>>BAIN: And instead, I
went into filmmaking,
which was such an
unconventional profession.
So these things kind of, they
just sort of happen, life
happens, and you just dream.
>>LISA: Well, you did
follow your dreams a lot.
What was the dream
that you were having?
I mean, specifically, was
there a specific dream,
or was it a series of--
>>BAIN: I dreamed of freedom.
I didn't hold it that way.
I didn't really understand it in
that way, but when I look back
and when in meditation, for
instance, when I spend time
with myself at earlier times
in my life, which I do daily
sometimes more than
once, I am very
intimate with those
past versions of myself.
And he did not really have
the courage or the support
to have big dreams, but
longed for the freedom.
Just didn't know how to
put his finger on why
life felt so tense,
why he felt such
a pressure to conform and to
be a part of the community
in the very rigid ways
the community held itself.
So I knew then that
that desire to be free
was a light that was
burning very, very bright.
And it happened to show
up in a lot of ways,
including well, I'll do what
would have been considered
a Bohemian life, and
I'll do photography,
and I'll start writing,
and I'll dabble in film.
And then eventually that
became a passionate interest
in spirituality, and
consciousness, in metaphysics.
>>LISA: Not just anyone
makes it in the film industry
and then maintains
the integrity that you
have within the industry.
And it is your different
perspectives on life
that you bring to
your profession
that I think has allowed you to
have longevity that you've had
and also to continue on, even
with the different direction
with lecturing on creativity
and consciousness.
What enables you to hold on
to that aspect of your life
of semi-sanity, of creativity,
of consciousness in the world?
Small question.
>>BAIN: Well, it's
a great question.
It's a great question.
And believe me, I ask
it of myself constantly.
I am in love.
I am in love with spirituality.
I am in love with discovering
more and more of who I am,
who I really am, and more
and more of who we all
are in relationship
to each other.
And I have always
felt the pull of that.
And more and more
pieces come together
like little pieces dropping
into a jigsaw puzzle.
Once upon a time,
the idea that we
are separate and yet
connected was an abstraction.
And now I feel it,
I experience it.
So I'm in love with it.
And it's so generous with me.
Even when it's difficult, I
always just get enough love--
>>LISA: Ah, wonderful.
>>BAIN: --to keep
me on the hunt.
I call it the big hunt.
And so there's nothing
really I can do.
And there was a
time in my past when
I would have been
seduced off of it.
>>LISA: Many do get seduced.
>>BAIN: A huge hit, a
huge business success,
a huge film hit-- that kind
of thing when I look back
may well have
seduced me off of it.
And so there were
sort of protections
that I built into the place
because it's so clear to me
that the choice that I
made in this lifetime
was to come home to the
love and to find and explore
what really matters.
>>LISA: Are you talking
about that hit being
"What Dreams May Come?"
>>BAIN: No, I'm talking about
anything that would have been
such an enormous--
>>LISA: Right.
>>BAIN: --have such an enormous
impact that it might have
changed my life so dramatically
in terms of how the world
measures success--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>BAIN: --that it
might have moved me off
of the trail of my life.
So those were the earlier years.
And now, as you were saying,
what keeps you at this?
>>LISA: Right.
>>BAIN: Never say
never, but there
is no seduction that is
going to turn me away
from a path that has been
so beautiful, and magical,
and generous.
So I've matured into it.
And that's the best answer that
I can come to, and I just--
>>LISA: Oh.
It's a beautiful answer.
That's a beautiful answer.
Did you go through periods
of studying meditation
or of long journeys
within a certain type
of a teacher or a journey in
your life prior to filmmaking?
>>BAIN: Prior to
filmmaking, absolutely.
When I was very little,
I lived in this town
that we talked about of 3,000
people, French Canadian town.
And it was a tourist
town, so in the winter
there was nobody in the
town except on weekends
because it was a ski town.
So we'd go from 3,000 to
like 6,000 on the weekends
when the snow was on the ground.
And in the summer, it would
go to 40,000 or 50,000.
There were people that had
little summer cottages.
It was a small
French Canadian town.
My ethnicity and religious
background is Jewish.
And I lived in a town that
had like 10 Jewish families--
--but there was a synagogue.
And the synagogue was there
because in the summer time
there were all these
people to fill it.
And so, at one point when
I was very young, even then
I latched on to
the call of spirit.
And I thought then that I
was going to be a rabbi.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>BAIN: So, yes, this
is a very, very long--
>>LISA: Long journey for you.
>>BAIN: --long journey.
And the first film that I
was ever involved in was-- I
wrote "The Jesus Film,"
which if you Google it,
it's the most widely
seen film on the planet.
And so even when I didn't
know I was wandering,
I have never wandered too
far off the soft shoulder
on either side of the road.
>>LISA: So when the
script came to you
of "What Dreams may
Come," did you immediately
resonate with that
film as being something
that you thought was going to
express your inner feeling?
>>BAIN: At the time
that that script came,
I was partnered with a
gentleman named Stephen Simon.
And Stephen had
developed that script.
He had developed it
for many, many years.
And we partnered up,
and the first time
that I saw that movie, I cried.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>BAIN: I still get choked up.
I cried because I thought
oh my goodness, this
has given expression to a more
of what matters to me that I
hold as beautiful, and
good, and true than anything
that I have experienced in film.
>>LISA: Just when
you read the script?
>>BAIN: Just when
I read the script.
>>LISA: So it popped
off the page instantly.
>>BAIN: And so I
thought what a miracle.
And that was a gift
from Stephen to me.
>>LISA: Wonderful.
Well, let's take a
look at this actually.
There's a couple of clips
that we have around the movie
that you have found
some beautiful teaching
moments within.
And it's really one
of my favorite movies.
And this is one of my favorite
scenes from the movie.
Let's take a look.
>>CHRIS: Nice
place you got here.
>>ALBERT: Oh, no, no, no, no.
Nice place you got here.
>>CHRIS: Me?
>>ALBERT: Sure!
You're making all of this.
See, we're all pretty
insecure at first,
so we see ourself
somewhere safe, comforting.
We all paint our own
surroundings, Chris,
but you're the first guy
I know to use real paint.
>>CHRIS: There is
so much here she
didn't paint, like that bird.
>>ALBERT: And it
gave you a start,
sort of like holding
on to hand rails.
Now you're creating
an entire world here
from your imagination,
from paintings
you love, anything you want.
>>CHRIS: Why doesn't it move?
>>ALBERT: It'll move
when you want it to.
>>ALBERT: Ho hoo!
You go boy!
>>CHRIS: Can I make it dive?
>>ALBERT: You're
the painter now.
It's your world!
>>CHRIS: Yeaaaaah aha!
>>ALBERT: Whoo!
Hahahaha.
Look at it go.
Whoo!
>>CHRIS: How about
maybe turquoise wings?
>>ALBERT: Turquoise
in the house!
>>CHRIS: And a little
mauve, all right.
>>ALBERT: Whoo hoo hoo!
>>CHRIS: Whoa!
[SPLAT]
>>CHRIS: I didn't do that.
>>ALBERT: No, I did.
>>LISA: This movie is
so important in my life,
but that was a
wonderful, incredible way
of showing what
we-- that we create
our own realities in
certain ways, right?
>>BAIN: Yeah, to me,
it's a documentary.
>>LISA: A documentary?
>>BAIN: Cuba says, "We all
create our own reality.
You're just the first
one to use real paint."
In this clip, he's
creating in a dream.
And in this particular
dream, it happens
to be an afterlife dream.
He's passed on.
But who's to say
that that is not
how we generate all of this.
I certainly have an
inkling that it is.
I'm not-- I'm just saying.
>>LISA: No.
We know.
I mean, it makes
sense in every level.
Scientific level, whatever--
>>BAIN: At every level.
And there are ways
that we do it.
So, as we said before,
there are raw materials
which are desire, and
expectation, and imagination.
And we work on those raw
materials in the same way
that a painter uses
colors or a sculptor
uses a chisel on marble.
We chisel away at those raw
materials with some tools.
And those tools are our
beliefs, and our thoughts,
and our choices,
and our decisions,
and our attitudes,
and our feelings.
And the interplay between
those shows up on the,
I call it the holodeck.
It's like the--
>>LISA: Holodeck.
>>BAIN: --the holodeck.
We are walking--
>>LISA: --holographic--
>>BAIN: --the
holographic reality.
We're literally moving with
a deeper and deeper and more
and more intimate awareness
of that process is happening
all the time, certainly for
our listeners here today.
They are committed
to this exploration.
And so what is
happening here is we
are very consciously becoming
intimate with our subconscious.
We are walking through our
subconscious all the time.
>>LISA: Well, just
as he had painted
the bird a different
color, we do that when
we make a conscious
choice to take
a different direction
in our life.
>>BAIN: We do that when
we make a conscious choice
to take a different direction.
We do that when we
shift an emotional state
from feeling helpless,
or hopeless, or anxious,
or unappreciated,
or happy, glad, sad.
Every shift changes
the frequency game.
And no thought, or action,
or feeling, or belief
goes in ernest.
Every one of those
ripples across eternity.
>>LISA: And when
you made a choice
to start going into
corporations and lecturing
about consciousness,
how did that happen?
How did that paintbrush
direction happen?
>>BAIN: I was actually invited.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>BAIN: That's how it showed up.
I used to think that
seeing is believing,
and that cause leads to effect.
And I don't hold that anymore.
It's true, but there's a
overarching, a superseding way
that reality works, as well.
And that has to do with
well, effects lead to causes.
And because I had
a tremendous desire
to reach out to corporations
and to work not just
in the entertainment business
as much as I love it,
but with schools, and educators,
and with corporations,
because I had such
a desire for it,
at some point energy follows
attention, it manifested.
So effects lead to
causes in a more real way
than causes lead to effects.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>BAIN: I held that intention.
I often imagined
how that would work,
and I did it quite consciously.
And then one day someone who was
working for a big corporation--
they're actually the company
that is putting the XL
pipeline-- building the XL
pipeline-- somebody asked
if I would come
and work with them.
And I did.
>>LISA: Work with
them on creativity?
>>BAIN: Work with them on
creativity, and innovation,
and aligning inside
their divisions,
aligning some of the
teams so that everybody
was holding the same story.
And they were really,
really wonderful.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>BAIN: Really wonderful.
So I operate from a passionate
relationship with creativity.
And I am convinced
that right now business
is the primary area of
creativity on the planet.
>>LISA: Well, in my opinion,
it needs the most creativity
at this point because we are
having to reinvent ourselves
in business across the board.
And even there is an
increase in entrepreneurs.
And entrepreneurs
are constantly having
to reinvent themselves, which
is another definite need
for creativity.
So how do you bridge that gap?
How do you take a
corporation or even
an individual out of the mold
that isn't working any longer?
>>BAIN: Well, very
briefly, we refer
to how realities
are created, belief,
thought, choice, decision,
actions, and feelings,
and working upon imagination,
and expectations.
And that is also how
corporations operate.
They aren't as conscious
about it in that way.
Sometimes they are.
They don't hold it in the
language of metaphysics--
>>LISA: Right.
>>BAIN: --that we do.
>>BAIN: But they absolutely
have mission statements,
and they have vision
plans, and they
have goals quarterly, and
annually, and long-term.
So they are very,
very much in alignment
with these principles.
And they have the same kinds
of challenges that we have,
which are getting
our espoused values
in line with our actual values.
And as someone who has spent
many years studying what goes
unsaid, whether it's
the making of a film.
What is powerful in a
scene, like the scene
that you just saw,
is not the words
that come out but the 97%
of all communication that
is non-verbal.
That is where the
real messages lie.
In films, that's called subtext.
>>LISA: Ah.
Uh-huh.
>>BAIN: And in life, it's called
subconscious communications.
So you can string
together any words
from a script or any
communication in your office,
or in your home, or
in your car pool.
It is not the words that
carries the communication,
but is the mysterious thread
that strings them together that
has to do with your intent,
and where are you coming from,
and what is it that you want
the other person to do or say.
That is not in the
words, but that
is what makes a performance.
That's why you can do
Shakespeare 10 zillion times,
and it's always different.
And that is what is in
every communication .
>>LISA: The energetic
essence of it.
>>BAIN: The energetic essence,
and what is your real agenda?
I could say Lisa, it's so great
to be here with you today.
And I can also say it
passive aggressively.
I can also say it impatiently.
I can also say it-- so
more often than not,
we are not aware of the
real communication that
underlies what we are
sharing with others.
And the spiritual path
includes draining the water out
of the tub so that we see what's
down there so we understand
what our beliefs are and
what our intentions are.
And that holds true, as
well, in corporations.
So I work with them in that way
so that they have x-ray glasses
on, x-ray vision.
And they can more clearly
have an understanding
of where they're coming
from, and how others
are communicating
with them, and what
it is they're really
saying and visioning.
>>LISA: I really appreciate
that you don't bring it
to a new-age level
or metaphysical.
You keep it to a level that
a corporation can hear.
Even if it's a
Fortune 500 company
or a multi-billion
dollar corporation,
they can hear this language.
And if you really look at it,
a mission statement, a vision
statement, bylaws could be the
creative backbone of a company.
>>BAIN: And it is.
I mean, every great
company has their version
of a vision board--
>>LISA: Through the
vision statement, right?
>>BAIN: --through the
vision statement--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>BAIN: --through their
goals, through their reports,
through their direct reports.
>>LISA: They just
don't see it that way.
>>BAIN: They have
accountability practices.
They don't see it that
way, and sometimes they do.
But they don't have
the same kinds of tools
to add to their considerable
toolkit, the tools of being
accountable, and processing,
and getting in alignment,
and understanding so everybody
is playing from not just
the same script, but
from the same subtext.
So that's critical.
And I thank you for noticing,
for noticing that I really
make it a point to try
and demystify this stuff.
I have like a zero jargon plan.
>>LISA: No tolerance, huh?
>>BAIN: No because I find
I'll get into a habit
where I start using phrases, and
it becomes a shorthand for me,
and pretty soon it's brittle.
There's no juiciness left it in.
>>LISA: And it wasn't
yours or-- yeah.
>>BAIN: Yeah, and often
it's not even mine.
So it's like hand me down
somebody else's experience,
and I'm just parrotting it.
So if it's not
from my experience,
it's going to be very hard
to generously share it
with somebody.
>>LISA: I love that you
said that because one
of the most incredible
essences I get from you
is your authenticity.
You are so true and
impeccable with your word.
You really do live out
that fourth agreement
from Don Miguel Ruiz.
>>BAIN: From Miguel.
>>LISA: --yes-- is because you
are impeccable with your word.
You're careful
about what you say.
You're intentional.
You don't throw
statements out there just
for the sake of having
a colloquialism.
You are very truly
intentional, which I love.
And I see that in the choices
that you make of teaching,
or if it's
filmmaking, or if it's
the-- you have a radio show,
which I didn't mention earlier,
"Cutting Edge Consciousness,"
which I also love.
>>BAIN: Which you
were a guest on.
You were wonderful.
>>LISA: Yes.
And you do incredible
things like that.
You brought visual to something
that's audio, which who knew?
>>BAIN: Visual radio.
>>LISA: Visual radio.
That's good.
>>BAIN: It's not radio,
and it's not TV, right?
Well, what is it?
>>LISA: It's visual radio.
>>BAIN: We'll figure it out.
>>LISA: Again,
you're a visionary.
I want to take a look
back at the film,
"What Dreams May Come" because
this is another great clip.
And you use these
clips within your--
>>BAIN: I do..
>>LISA: --lectures and so forth
on spirituality, essentially.
This is what this is.
Take a look at this.
>>ALBERT: Let's
take the shortcut.
>>CHRIS: Nice shortcut.
>>ALBERT: It's easy, Chris.
Look at me.
>>CHRIS: I'm gonna drowned.
>>ALBERT: You can't.
You're already dead.
>>CHRIS: Oh.
Am I-- am I really here?
>>ALBERT: What do you
mean by you anyway?
Are you your arm or your leg?
>>CHRIS: Hardly.
>>ALBERT: Really?
If you lost all your limbs,
wouldn't you still be you?
>>CHRIS: I'd still be me.
>>ALBERT: So what is the me?
>>CHRIS: My brain, I suppose.
>>ALBERT: Your brain?
Your brain is a body part, like
your fingernail or your heart.
Why is that the part that's you?
>>CHRIS: Because I--
it's sort of a voice
in my head, the part of me
that thinks, that feels,
that is aware that
I exist at all.
>>ALBERT: So if you're aware
you exist, then you do.
That's why you're still here.
>>LISA: So in this
clip, the film
is talking about,
essentially, consciousness.
>>BAIN: Consciousness,
are you your body?
Who are you?
If you're not your body, if
you keep cutting it away,
you're not this,
then who are you?
>>LISA: One of the
incredible things
that I got from this movie is
a life-changing moment for me,
one of those transformational
films that changes your life.
And after I saw "What
Dreams May Come,"
I set up agreements with
the loved ones in my life
on how to communicate with
them in the afterlife.
And my mom and I are going to
communicate through clouds,
and my husband and I
are going to communicate
through a certain way, and my
daughter and I are going to--
and we have this
agreement in this lifetime
to be able to transfer the
relationship after our bodies
are gone because this film made
such an impact on me of what
it means to be consciousness.
And the limbs, and the
legs, and all of that
are vehicles that
we're in right now.
And we get these vehicles
to be able to do this,
to communicate, it's great.
But we can also communicate
on another level.
And that has changed
my relationships
with all of my loved ones.
So I know how to keep in contact
with them if one of our bodies
is to disappear for any reason.
So I'm just one person who
was affected by that film.
And I'm sure that you've
heard so many other things,
but how do we lose our
creativity in relationships?
>>BAIN: We start to
play it by a rote.
First of all, I believe that
there are only relationships.
>>LISA: Mmm, well,
that's interesting.
Yeah.
>>BAIN: So I'm
assuming you're talking
about primary relationships,
loving relationships,
committed relationships?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>BAIN: So the same holds true
for committed relationships,
but to a degree that is much
more impeccable and much more
responsible.
By that, I don't mean the burden
or obligation, but the ability
to rise in response to
whatever challenges come up.
It's such a glorious ability.
It's such a gift.
>>LISA: Some call it resilience.
>>BAIN: Some call it resilience,
and some call it just
the most wonderful,
gracious gift.
So when we begin to
take it for granted,
or if we're not growing,
if we're not actively
expanding the frontier of
what it means to be loving,
to see another person, and to
see ourselves with patience,
with compassion-- OK,
well that's the way
I was yesterday or last week.
And maybe it was a little tough.
So I came through it so I can
have a little more compassion
for that part of me.
And when I see that
in others, I can
have a little more
understanding, compassion,
being able to hear another,
to pay attention to another,
to create safety for another, to
reduce the risk of abandonment,
or loneliness, or
fear, or humiliation.
If I can do that not as an
obligation, but as a gift.
If I can do that, that's loving.
If I can increase pleasure for
another person emotionally,
mentally, and physically when
appropriate, where appropriate,
and how appropriate,
all of these things
as in a live, and vital,
and growing relationship,
the boundaries of
those possibilities
are constantly growing.
So I'm always pregnant with
what is possible for tomorrow.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>BAIN: That keeps it
alive, it keeps it juicy,
and it keeps it humble
because we never
have the assumption
that I know what
it's going to be like tomorrow.
And in my relationship
with Sandy--
>>LISA: Sandy, your wife, yeah.
>>BAIN: --we go
through like phases
where one or the
other of us starts
to take the other for granted.
Or think, you know, I think
I know what she wants,
or I think I know, or--
>>LISA: That's how we
lose our creativity, what
you're talking about now.
>>BAIN: That's what
loses the creativity
in that relationship.
And to pedal back for
a second, whether it's
a relationship with
a significant other,
or it's a relationship
with my work,
or it's a relationship with
a creative project, or a pet,
or my daughter--
>>LISA: Right.
>>BAIN: --or it's a relationship
with my drive to work, or to
and from the studio,
the degree to which I'm
present in it makes
it alive and juicy.
The more that I
am either absent,
or in my head, or
ruminating about yesterday,
or obsessing about
tomorrow-- and I
understand the pressures of it.
I don't live in a cave.
>>LISA: But that's
how you create.
>>BAIN: That's how you create.
What you put your
attention on, you find.
>>LISA: That's how
you create reality.
You are right.
Everything, you are in
relationship to everything.
If you're trying to
create the next thing,
you create it within the
relationship you have to it.
That is such a huge piece.
>>BAIN: That's everything.
We are two things.
We are creators, and
we are in relationship.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>BAIN: So if people
who are watching
come away with nothing
more than that,
it will have been
a glorious day.
We are creators.
Creativity is love's work.
And we are in relationship.
Some say that there is only one.
And that's true, but I am
not operating at the place
where I experience
myself as one.
I have moments, peak moments.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>BAIN: So right now part
of the game of my creativity
is that I am both
separate and one.
And I am in
relationship with all
of the diverse, myriad,
infinite experiences myself.
And we play the love game.
>>LISA: There's a
great way to learn
that is by having a child.
In your relationship
to everything,
they will reflect and mirror.
Your relationship to how
you hold your coffee cup,
they will reflect and mirror.
Your relationship to who
you're talking to on the phone,
they will imitate.
>>BAIN: You model an appetite
for life, it gets passed on.
>>LISA: And you can see that.
It's a wonderful way-- I
mean, conscious parenting
is a wonderful system
for accountability.
You do this in your life.
I mean, by calling attention to
that everything is relationship
is a hugely vital lesson.
It's a very distinct lesson,
but it's a beautiful lesson
to learn.
Absolutely beautiful.
>>BAIN: It's creative
relationships.
There are so many
in our community,
many of our friends-- we move
in largely the same circles--
many of our friends are some
of the leaders of conversations
like law of attraction, which
are beautiful and powerful,
powerful focuses.
>>LISA: Relationships.
>>BAIN: --Relationships.
And law of attraction
is a great example,
because what is
law of attraction?
What draws us to want to have
an understanding and an ease
with law of attraction?
What is it except
the desire to create?
To create what?
To create more bounty, more
prosperity, more abundance,
more flow, more intimacy, more
connection, more whatever the
what is, the verb is to create.
It is more properly
the laws of creation.
>>LISA: So that in that
way, we can use our mind
to create whatever is
true in our reality.
Another--
>>BAIN: And our hearts.
>>LISA: --another great point
from the movie "What Dreams
May Come."
That's why I say this was
so far ahead of its time.
And this whole
movie is basically
the law of attraction,
and it's couched
around death and suicide.
It's phenomenal.
Take a look at this clip
about whatever is in our minds
is true.
[VERY SOFT SINGING]
>>CHRIS: I need to talk to you,
and you don't have to respond.
This is a one-way ticket for me.
My hanging around here
is not helping you,
and it's killing me.
So today is kind of a D Day.
D for decision, I guess.
Well, divorce.
>>ANNIE: That would be
two d's, wouldn't it?
>>CHRIS: I stand corrected.
[GASP]
>>CHRIS: Look what happens
when you don't say anything
for a month.
Cindy called.
She said everything's
waiting for you.
All the artists and
curators will meet with you
when you're better.
And I told her it was the
museum, one of those meetings
that kept you from
driving that day.
And if you went back, it
would mean you weren't sorry
and you weren't wrong.
And you would be
betraying your children.
And she said you were crazy.
And I said she was a soulless
bitch, and I hung up on her.
That didn't go over very well.
What's true in our minds is
true whether some people know it
or not.
That's when I realized
I'm part of the problem.
Not because I remind you, but
because I couldn't join you.
So I left you alone.
Don't give up, OK?
[SNIFFLING]
>>ANNIE: OK.
OK.
[SOB]
>>CHRIS: It's OK.
[RIP]
[SOBBING]
>>LISA: So in this clip, he
went back into the dream state
to communicate with her?
Is that what he was doing?
>>BAIN: He went
into his own story.
You're absolutely right.
She had lost her children.
They'd both lost their children.
And she had such grief,
and he walled himself off
and went into denial
because he had
a story that he
needed to be strong.
And so she had nobody
to share that grief.
She had this power
in the telling,
and she was even more alienated.
She had her grief, and
she had the loneliness
of not being able to communicate
with him and share it.
And so she ended up having
to go to this asylum.
She had a nervous breakdown,
and he comes and visits her
at this point.
And he has this ticket.
And he says this
is a decision day.
This is a one-way ticket
decision about divorce.
So it says it's a d day.
She says well, that
would be double d day.
And now they're
having a conversation
about what really went on.
And he's realizing he left her
to do all the heavy lifting
around the emotions and that
he was protecting himself
not feeling anything.
So, to me, the beauty of this
is that when we're inside
our bubble, our stories,
the way we hold life,
we're so identified with it,
it's very difficult to change.
It's a fish in water.
But when that fish flings
itself up on the river bank,
it can then look back and say--
>>LISA: That's water.
>>BAIN: --I came out of water.
So that's what is
happening here.
He gives it a name.
They call it double d.
And now they can begin
to relate to that story
rather than be
identified with it.
And when we do that, the
door to freedom swings open.
>>LISA: How do we do
that in our own lives?
>>BAIN: Well, how many times--
I'll speak personally--
things that I hold,
somebody disappointed me,
or I have a great thing
that I'm going on right now.
I have a number of work
relationships mostly
that have certain
accountabilities to me.
And about five of them
are out of integrity
around their accountability.
So now there is only one common
denominator in these five.
>>LISA: That would be you.
>>BAIN: So it'd be
really easy for me
to get very caught up in
the righteous indignation
or in the wagging finger.
But the reality is this
is five of these things,
and they're all
accountable to me.
So this is a mirror about
how I hold accountability
and what my expectations are.
So when I can see
that, I am calling it
my accountability story.
>>LISA: That's interesting.
Yeah.
>>BAIN: Before I can really
have an effective communication
with these people, I'm
naming it I have a story,
and it should be like this,
and it should be like this.
And oh poor me.
So I'm calling that all
my accountability story,
and now I'm examining it.
And so because I'm
not inside of it,
I'm not just doing my knee jerk
habituated brittle responses.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>BAIN: But I can begin to
have a process with myself,
and free up some energy, and
look at what is going on here.
What might be some of
the elements in here
that would lead me to create
this repetitive pattern where
I have an opportunity
to be a victim?
>>LISA: That's so interesting
because this whole interview
I've been talking about
your accountability
and authenticity.
And you don't even
know about that.
It just actually shows
that you are that way,
and that we do get stuck
inside of our story,
and that we form our own
stories around things.
Just as easily as we form
it, can we unform it?
Like what are you going to do?
You've looked at that.
You've stepped outside
of your story now.
What changes?
>>BAIN: I am making a
friend of uncertainty
because I would really love
to just have the answers.
And there's nothing
creative in that.
>>LISA: Have it complete.
>>BAIN: Yes.
Can it just be complete
because I'm uncomfortable?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>BAIN: So I am watching
my discomfort as much
as I can because it
is not my default
way of operating in
the world is to feel.
So I am feeling as much
as I can the discomfort,
I'm not running from it, and I'm
allowing what comes up in its
own cadence and its own timing
to come up before I go back
and instead of having the
conversation that I would have
had, which would have been
probably not pretty and not
helpful, I'm waiting
for--and I don't know what.
I don't have an answer here.
I don't have an answer, but I'm
waiting for something creative
to emerge in me that allows me
to be more responsible for what
is going on than I would
have been if I just went off
unprepared at the limit of
my potential to be prepared.
>>LISA: So this is you living--
>>BAIN: This is
new ground for me.
You can tell, I don't--
>>LISA: This is great.
No, but this is how you
are experiencing it.
And this is being creative.
>>BAIN: This is being creative.
Creativity happens in the heart.
It happens in a space
behind the heart.
That is the portal through
which we experience
what is innovative and creative.
Then kicks in this
magnificent inner-engineer
strategic technician, the doer,
the integrated masculine energy
that fills the space and
creates form out of function.
That's beautiful, but when we
are estranged from this part,
it can go off and
sometimes be a mania.
You know, when you're
just doing, doing, doing,
and it's unrelated to
making the context bigger,
and making the context new,
and making the context fresh.
So what happens
between the doing
and the being state,
in between those
is birthed some
kind of revelation.
>>LISA: That's
what, reinvention?
That's what--
>>BAIN: That's reinvention.
That's innovation.
That's where the juicy stuff is.
>>LISA: That's where
creativity comes.
So, as I said earlier, you
choose scripts and stories
based on your emotions
and feelings around them.
There's another film
that you showed me,
which I think is wonderful.
It's called from
"Homeless to Harvard."
How did you come
across this story?
>>BAIN: This is
a while back now.
I was in my agent's office.
And he got up to do something
outside of the room.
And that would be my
cue to actually see
what might be
interesting in here.
And I found this
thing on the floor.
And it was an interview
between Liz Murray
and I think with Barbara
Walters, or something
like that.
And I was fascinated by
it, "Homeless to Harvard."
I thought that's interesting.
And when he came back
in, I asked him about it.
And he told me it
was a true story
of Liz Murray, a young
girl whose parents were
both drug addicted and
had AIDS in the Bronx.
And the mother passed
away, and the young girl
ended up on the streets and
realized her only way out
was going to be to have a
zero tolerance for self-pity
and to apply herself.
And she--
>>LISA: A true story?
>>BAIN: --true story.
She went through four years
of college and two years
living on the subway and
eating out of dumpsters.
And she earned a
scholarship to Harvard.
And she is a hero
of mine, a shero.
>>LISA: A shero?
We actually have a
clip of this, which
is a wonderful-- I'm amazed
that this is a true story,
and she did this.
Let's take a look at this.
>>MALE SPEAKER: She
did it while homeless.
Her mother dead, her
father a drug addict,
living in shelters,
and any way I
describe this can't do justice
to her accomplishments,
so I'll just introduce to
you our sixth New York Times
scholarship winner, Liz Murray.
[APPLAUSE]
>>LIZ: Everything's changed.
My life will never be the same.
And I don't know what else
to say except for thank you.
Thank you very much.
[APPLAUSE]
>>MALE SPEAKER: Liz?
Liz?
How'd you do this?
>>LIZ: How could I not do it?
My parents showed me
what the alternative was.
>>MALE SPEAKER: Didn't you
ever feel sorry for yourself?
>>LIZ: Sorry?
>>MALE SPEAKER:
Sleeping in subways,
eating out of dumpsters?
>>LIZ: That had always,
uh, been my life.
And I really-- I
feel that I got lucky
because any sense of security
was pulled out from under me.
So I was forced to look forward.
I had to.
There was no going back.
And I reached a point where
I just thought, all right.
I'm gonna work as
hard as I possibly can
and see what happens.
And now I'm going to college.
And, uh, and the New York
Times is going to pay.
[LAUGHTER AND APPLAUSE]
>>MALE SPEAKER: So you
were lucky, but is there
anything you'd change
if you were able?
>>LIZ: Yeah.
I'd give it back, all of it,
if I could have my family back.
>>LISA: It's amazing
how a minute long clip
could make me cry.
It is such a powerful story.
And she stuck with
what she believed in
even though she had no
reference in her life.
She was dealt a bad deck, and
she made the best out of it
when she had to treat
her mother as her baby.
I mean, that really
broke the mold.
How do you teach people to
stick with what you believe in,
to not go after the
shiny, bright whatever,
and to stay true to
what you believe in?
In the projects you choose, and
the creativity that you have,
and the relationships that
you have, how do you do that?
You've done that.
>>BAIN: It's an ongoing process.
And it has to do with values.
I map my values, and I
encourage other people
to map their values.
>>LISA: And what does that mean?
>>BAIN: --to be clear on what
I value, and what you value,
we have certain kinds
of areas in our life.
There is my career life,
and my home and family life,
and my spiritual life,
and my hobby life,
and my recreational life,
my life around health.
And so it's like a wheel.
And I grade them,
and I make sure
that I am feeding
attention into,
so that they don't go out of
balance so that I don't become
a workaholic, or so that I
don't become somebody who's
escaping life through
eating or whatever it is.
I do my best to
keep them modulated.
And because these
things are my values,
and when I score
them on a 1 to 10,
I can see where I
give more attention
and where I give less attention.
And I try to balance them out.
When I know my values, I have
an opportunity to express
character because one cannot
have character without having
values.
Character to me is the degree
to which I live by my values.
>>LISA: It's the same
thing, in essence?
>>BAIN: Well, if I'm living
in accordance with my values,
I have character.
If I don't know
what my values are,
then my character is
all over the place.
So when I have values, and my
values are always deepening,
I will never ever achieve
perfect character.
But it's like the guiding star.
It's a mission that is
bigger than this life,
and it informs my choices.
So now it's very clear that
if I have an opportunity
to take on a project or
to make a choice that
is inconsistent with what my
values are, I absolutely know.
And I can't hide from myself.
You become very
honest with yourself.
But one has to know what are
the lines that I will not
cross in the various areas
of my life in order for me
to know whether
I'm crossing them.
>>LISA: In what you're
doing now and how
this has evolved into
your life now-- of course,
media is changing.
We have Gaiam TV, which
is online media, which
is target, and focused,
and incredible.
How do you see you
changing what you're
doing in terms of
transformational producer,
which I love that title, and
keeping up with the changing
trends of media, while staying
true to your authentic message?
>>BAIN: I don't know.
[CHUCKLE]
>>LISA: That was a big question.
>>BAIN: No, no.
It's a great question.
I don't know.
I know that I am passionate
about the work that I do.
I'm passionate about
this kind of discussion--
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>BAIN: --whether I'm
having it with you,
or I'm having it with
others, or I'm having it
on my own program, I
am passionate about it.
There have been and
there will continue
to be opportunities that unfold.
And some of them will be out
of alignment with my values.
And so it would be
out of character
for me to accept them.
Some of them will
be in alignment.
And if they're
fun, if they allow
me to bring to the table as
many of my gifts and talents
as possible, and if they
are valuable to myself
and to others, those
are the four metrics
that add up to a yes for me.
>>LISA: And they
have, as we've seen,
come through in all of the
choices that you've made.
>>BAIN: They come through,
and I desire and expect
that more will continue
to come through.
And I am in a dance
with uncertainty.
I am certain only that the
world is a loving place,
and that I have an
ability to respond.
>>LISA: So creativity is
a dance with uncertainty
in a loving space.
>>BAIN: Yes.
That is so beautiful.
>>LISA: You said. it.
>>BAIN: Well, you framed it in
a way that I had never put it,
and I love that.
So I'll be using that.
Thank you.
>>LISA: You put it there.
You have a radio show called
"Cutting Edge Consciousness,"
which is a brilliant way
of taking online radio,
moving it to a visual, and your
technology use is really great.
So I love that you've
combined those two together.
And it's with really, really
brilliant people bringing
on great concepts and
inspiring conversations.
So I encourage people
to take a look at that.
How long have you
been doing that?
>>BAIN: Two years, There's
200 hours up there now.
>>LISA: Wow.
And do you feel that--
>>BAIN: We have the most
fantastic, fantastic people.
For anybody who's
not local, they
can get podcasts,
www.cuttingedgeconsciousness.com.
>>LISA: And do you see the
trend towards focused media
being more of the
online aspects of media?
>>BAIN: I do.
I believe that this is
not great news for me,
and even worse news
for you in some ways.
And by that I mean
I'm confident you
are going to expand your
platform in myriad ways.
But I believe that
radio-- well, you're FM.
So you have a much
bigger window.
I am on AM.
And the days of AM radio
are clearly numbered.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>BAIN: So I believe
that there are automobile
manufactures who, in
the next model year--
Porsche is one of
them-- won't even
have AM available in their cars.
So what is happening are
some of the gigantic media
corporations are
assembling podcasters,
and they are bundling them
into sort of collectives
and selling advertising around
them, looking for best of breed
in particular areas.
And then they'll offer them up.
And you'll be downloading
that in your cars and--
>>LISA: Oh, wow, membership
types of functionality.
That's fascinating.
So many changes
that are happening,
and they're happening
fast, so it's
important to stay creative, to
constantly reinvent yourself,
to use that creativity and
love in that reinvention.
You're a gem, a gem.
I love you.
I think you're just awesome.
[CHUCKLING]
>>LISA: --for lack
of a better word.
But thank you so much
for being with me.
And thank you so much for
being with me as well.
And if you'd like to share this
interview with your friends,
you can go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[BACKGROUND MUSIC]